Welcome everyone to
the second part of
our lesson on
Populating Occupancy Grid.
In this video, we will
define the concept of
an inverse measurement model
and see how to build
a simple inverse measurement
model for a lidar sensor.
We will also describe ray
tracing which will significantly
reduce computational
requirements for
the inverse measurement
model. Let's dive in.
Recall from the previous video
that in order to
perform the Bayesian update
of our occupancy grid,
we need to be able to evaluate
the log-odds update rule.
To do this we need to compute
p of mi given yt which
represents the probability of
a cell mi in the occupancy
grid being occupied,
given a certain measurement
yt is obtained by the lidar.
However, so far the measurement
models we have seen have
taken the form the probability
of yt given mi,
which is in the mapping
case represents
the probability of getting
a certain lidar measurement,
given a cell in the
occupancy grid is occupied.
So for occupancy grid updates,
we need to flip
this measurement model around.
That is, we have to construct
an inverse measurement model that
constructs p of mi given
yt for every new
measurement received.
As mentioned in
the first lesson of
this module, for simplicity sake,
we will only look at
the lidar data as
a 2D range data containing
two sets of information.
The bearing at
which each beam was
fired and the range
that the beam traveled.
This is easily extended to
3D with the addition
of an elevation angle.
The bearing of each beam
is represented
by a set of angles Phi evenly
spaced within a range defined by
the minimum and maximum
viewing angles of the sensor.
Typical rotating lidar
are able to capture
data in all directions
around the vehicle,
we'll assume the
available bearings in
this course will cover
all 360 degrees.
The range of each beam
corresponds to the distance
it has traveled
before impacting an object
represented by r1 to rJ.
The range is measured between
minimum and maximum ranges
r min and r max,
and we'll assume r min
is zero for simplicity.
Most lidar today will also
return a no echo signal,
if a particular beam
does not return an echo,
indicating the absence of
any object within range
in that direction.
As we proceed in this video,
we will make
an assumption here that
the entire lidar scan
measurements from
a single rotation of the sensor
is measured at
the same instant in time.
This is not an accurate
model for a vehicle
moving at speed with
a rotating lidar head,
as we must actually
correct for the motion
of the vehicle,
the correction can be
done using the state
estimates you developed
in course two,
and interpolating the motion
between these state
estimates as needed.
So the inverse measurement model
will take the following form.
Suppose this is the vehicle
with a lidar sensor collecting
range measurements at
different bearings
in the following environment.
We construct a temporary
occupancy grid that
encompasses the maximum range
of the beams in all directions.
The coordinate frame for
this measurement grid uses
the occupancy grid map frame
and so we define
a position x1 t and x2 t and an
orientation x3 t of
the sensor in
the occupancy grid frame.
In practice, this
occupancy grid frame
is set to the vehicle frame
and the map is transformed at
each step based on
our state estimates.
We're now ready to populate
the temporary measurement grid
with occupancy probabilities.
Based on the current lidar data,
we can define three
distinct areas of
the measurement grid.
First, there is an area of
no information which none
of the lidar beams had
been able to reach.
The current lidar scan provides
no new information about
the environment in this area.
Then there is an area with
low probability of an object,
as all the beams
have passed through
this area without
encountering anything.
Finally, there is an area
with high probability
of an object,
in which the lidar has
come into contact with
an object and has returned
a non maximum range value.
To translate these areas
onto the measurement grid,
each grid square will
be assigned a range in
bearing relative to
the vehicles current location.
The relative range of
each cell is simply
the Euclidean distance
from the sensor to
the cell, defined as follows,
where ri is the range
to grid cell i and mxi
and myi are the x and y
coordinates of the center
of the grid cell.
Finally, x1 t and
x2 t are the sensor location
at the current time
t. The relative bearing to
each cell is computed using
the tan inverse function.
Here Phi identifies
the bearing to
the given cell in
reference to the sensor's
coordinate frame.
For each cell, we
associate the most
relevant lidar beam by
finding the measurement
with the minimum error
between its beam angle
and the cell bearing.
We then define two parameters
Alpha and Beta,
which define a sector
around each beam in which
cell occupancy should be
determined based
on the beam range.
This essentially creates
a region around each beam
which will get assigned
the measurement information
of that particular beam.
Alpha controls the range
cells at the range of
the beam which will be
tagged as high probability.
Beta controls the angle
of the beam for which
cells will be marked as
either low or high probability.
We are now ready to assign
a probability that
any cell is occupied
given the lidar
measurements received
based on these three
types of cells.
The no information zone
corresponds to
all cells with a greater range,
than the measured range
or outside the angle
Beta sized cone for the
measurements associated with it.
We assign a probability
of an obstacle equal to
the prior probability
of a cell being
occupied which is usually 0.5.
The high information zone defines
cells that fall within
Alpha over two of
the range measurement
and within Beta over
two of the angle of the
measurement associated with it.
We assign an occupied
probability of
greater than 0.5. to these cells.
Finally, the low
information zone is
defined by cells that
have a range less than
the measured range minus
Alpha over two and
lie within the Beta sized
cone about the measurement.
We assign an occupied
probability of
less than 0.5 to these cells.
For example, let's say
a lidar scan returns
a range to an object at
the location marked by a red X.
The affected area which
will be tagged as
high probability is given in red.
Increasing the value of Alpha
will increase the range of
the affected region and
increasing the value of
Beta affects the angle
of the affected region.
We can now construct
the full inverse
measurement model to
be used in our log-odds update.
However, this simple
inverse measurement model
can be computationally expensive.
It requires a full update
of every cell in
the measurement map,
and relies on multiple
floating-point operations
to identify which measurements
correspond to which cells.
An alternative, is to use
a ray tracing algorithm,
such as the computer
science classic,
the Bresenham's line algorithm.
Bresenham's line algorithm
was originally
designed in the early 1960's
to efficiently
solve the line
plotting problem for
displays and printing on
the available hardware
of the day.
By ray tracing along
the beams of the lidar scan,
we reduce the number
of cells that need to
be processed and identify them
more quickly relying on
integer addition subtraction and
bit shifting to move through
the grid along the lidar beams.
Interestingly, many beams go
through the same cells near
the car greatly increasing
the confidence in
measurements nearby.
This concludes our discussion of
the inverse measurement model for
log odds occupancy grid mapping.
Let's summarize.
In this video, we constructed
a simple inverse
measurement model for
lidar data needed in
the log-odds update step.
We also briefly covered
a potential improvement by using
ray tracing to
speed computations.
In our next video,
we will look into the many steps
needed to prepare
a 3D lidar scan to be used
for occupancy grid mapping.
See you there.